a mortgage loan subject to changes in interest rates; when rates change, monthly payments increase or decrease at intervals determined by the lender and a prescribed index and set margin; the monthly payment increases usually have a per adjustment and a lifetime cap.
an announcement—usually paid—of a product’s or service’s benefits that is intended to encourage its purchase.
loans that can be used to cover the gap between the cost of postsecondary education and the amount of financial aid received in the form of grants, scholarships, and federal student loans. Since alternative or private loans can have higher interest rates and fewer flexible repayment programs, they should only be considered after all federal loan options are exhausted.
loans that can be used to cover the gap between the cost of postsecondary education and the amount of financial aid received in the form of grants, scholarships, and federal student loans. Since alternative or private loans can have higher interest rates and fewer flexible repayment programs, they should only be considered after all federal loan options are exhausted.
the process by which loan payments are applied to the principal, or amount borrowed, as well as the interest on a loan according to a set schedule.
the percentage cost of credit on an annual basis, which must be disclosed by law.
the annual rate of return on an investment, which must be disclosed by law and which varies by the frequency of compounding.
a contract between an individual and an insurance company where the individual makes a series of payments that are invested by the company and repaid to the individual at a later date–generally during retirement. Annuities may be fixed or variable.
a rise in value or price.
something of monetary value owned by an individual or an organization.
a computer terminal used to conduct business with a financial institution or purchase items such as postage stamps or transportation tickets; also known as a cash machine.
a sales charge paid when investments are sold.
an illegal sales technique in which sellers advertise a product with the intention of persuading customers to buy a more expensive product or; loan terms are switched and become less favorable to the consumer.
a short-term mortgage in which small periodic payments are made until the completion of the term, at which time the balance is due as a single lump-sum payment.
a state of being legally released from the obligation to repay some or all debt in exchange for the forced loss of certain assets. A court’s determination of personal bankruptcy remains in a consumer’s credit record for 10 years.
a state or federally chartered for-profit financial institution that offers commercial and consumer loans and other financial services.
services such as checking accounts, savings accounts, automated teller machines and online banking provided by individual banks.
a person or organization named to receive assets after an individual’s death.
a certificate representing the purchaser’s agreement to lend a business or government money on the promise that the debt will be paid—with interest—at a specific time.
the act of receiving and using something belonging to somebody else, with the intention of returning or repaying it-often with interest in the case of borrowed money.
financial services businesses that buy and sell securities such as stocks and bonds to investors.
a plan for managing money, dividing up expected income and expenses among spending and saving options based on personal goals during a given time period.
the ability to repay a loan from present income; used in loan underwriting.
money or other assets owned by individuals or used in operating a business.
income that results when the selling price of an asset is greater than the original purchase price.
monetary loss that occurs when the selling price of an asset is less than the original amount invested.
a profession or field of employment for which one study or trains, such as financial services or medicine. A pattern of activities and positions involved in an individual’s lifetime of work to which the person has made a long-term commitment.
a measure of the money a person receives and spends.
a summary of receipts and payments for a given period, helpful when preparing a budget; also known as an income and expense statement.
refers to trustworthiness; one of three factors in credit scoring (e.g., paying bills on time shows financial responsibility).
the act of giving to charitable organizations or to those in need.
a written order directing a bank or credit union to pay a person or business a specific sum of money.
a specific-purpose loan requiring repayment with interest and any other finance charges by a specific date. Examples include most mortgages or auto loans.
property that a borrower promises to give up to a lender in case of default.
physical objects—such as fine art, stamps, and antiques—that an investor buys in the hope that they will grow in value.
a business that specializes in obtaining payments from debtors who have defaulted on their loans.
the process of seeking information about products and services to find the best quality or utility at the best price.
payment and benefits for work performed; also payment to injured or unemployed workers or their dependents.
an expression of dissatisfaction with a product or service, often in the form of a letter to the seller or manufacturer documenting the problem and stating the desired solution.
interest earned not only on the principal but also on the interest already earned.
paying interest on the principal and on interest already earned; the longer the money is left in the account, the more dramatic the compounding effect.
a buyer or user of goods and services for personal use.
individuals or groups that actively promote consumer interest in areas such as health and safety, education, redress, truthful advertising, fairness in the marketplace, and environmental protection.
wrongful or criminal deception intended to manipulate consumer for financial or other personal gain.
a legally binding agreement between two or more parties.
a tool used to choose among alternatives involves weighing the cost of a product or service against the benefit it will provide.
an agreement to provide goods, services, or money in exchange for future payments with interest by a specific date or according to a specific schedule. The use of someone else’s money for a fee.
an establishment that collects and distributes credit-history information of individuals and businesses.
a plastic card that authorizes the delivery of goods and services in exchange for future payment with interest, according to a specific schedule.
an organization that provides debt and money management advice and assistance to people with debt problems.
financial products such as credit cards, bank loans, etc.
a measure of creditworthiness based on an analysis of the consumer’s financial history, often computed as a numerical score, using the FICO or other scoring systems to analyze the consumer’s credit.
an official record of a borrower’s credit history, including such information as the amount and type of credit used, outstanding balances, and any delinquencies, bankruptcies, or tax liens.
a measure of creditworthiness based on an analysis of the consumer’s financial history, often computed as a numerical score, using the FICO or other scoring systems to analyze the consumer’s credit.
a state or federally chartered not-for-profit financial cooperative that provides financial services to its member-owners, who have met specific employment, residence, or other eligibility requirements.
the presumption that a specific borrower has sufficient assets, income, and/or inclination to repay a loan.
a plastic card that provides access to electronic funds transfer (EFT) from an automated teller machine (ATM) or a point-of-sale (POS) terminal.
something owed, usually measured in dollars. Entire amount of money owed to lenders.
the percentage of a consumer's monthly gross income that goes toward paying debts.
a method of selecting a course of action after gathering and evaluating information and considering the costs and benefits of various alternatives and consequences.
the dollar amount or percentage of a loss that is not insured, as specified in an insurance policy.
in some states a deed is used instead of a mortgage to secure payment and the title is conveyed to a trustee.
failure of a borrower to repay a student loan according to the terms agreed upon when the promissory note was signed.
when a loan payment stays the same while the interest rate increases.
failure of a borrower to make a loan payment on the scheduled payment due date.
the quantity of a good or service that buyers are willing and able to buy at all possible prices during a period of time.
a person who relies on another individual for support.
decline in a product’s value that starts the moment a product is purchased (e.g., car).
an amount or fee a borrower pays to a lender, which will help decrease the interest rate on a mortgage loan.
gross pay minus deductions for taxes.
a strategy for reducing some types of risk by selecting a wide variety of investments.
earnings from corporate stock or credit union share accounts.
an initial, partial payment made at the time of purchase to permit the buyer to take delivery of the purchase, OR a partial payment made to evidence good faith that the buyer will complete the purchase transaction at the time the contract is signed.
earnings from employment, including commissions and tips.
short-term loans granted regardless of credit history, often for very short periods and at high interest rates.
worldwide system that results from choices of consumers, workers, business owners, manufacturers and government officials in multiple societies and with increasing trade and cultural exchange.
the shifting of money from one financial institution account to another without the physical movement of cash.
money set aside for unexpected expenses or for living costs in case of job loss.
compensation that an employee receives in addition to a wage or salary. Examples include health insurance, life insurance, childcare, retirement pension, and subsidized meals.
tax-deferred investment programs, such as 401(k) plans for corporate employees and Section 457 plans for state and local government employees, which provide, in some cases, employer-matching funds.
an individual, who conceives of, establishes, operates, and assumes the risks of a business.
a process that involves (a) seeing an opportunity to provide a product/service, (b) taking initiative to find out about competitors and what customers want from the product/service, and (c) developing plans to market the business, analyze potential profit or losses, and produce the product/service.
a federal law that forbids lenders from discriminating against loan applicants based on gender, race, marital status, religion, national origin, age, or receipt of public assistance.
stock ownership in a corporation.
funds held by a third party for future use by the borrower; funds are for special purposes and may be paid out or returned to the borrower only under certain conditions.
the assets and debts that a person leaves at death.
a set of moral principles or beliefs that govern an individual’s actions.
the amount a student and his or her family are expected to pay toward college expenses for one academic year.
the costs of goods and services, including those that are fixed such as rent and auto loan payments and those that are variable such as food, clothing, and entertainment.
a federal law that gives consumers more ways to recover their credit reputations after they have been victims of identity theft, and allows consumers to request one free copy of their credit reports from the major credit reporting agencies each year.
a part of the Truth in Lending Act that mandates a description of key features and costs— such as APR, grace period, balance calculation, annual fees, and penalty fees—on credit card applications.
a federal law that addresses billing problems with open-end credit accounts by requiring, for example, that consumers send a written error notice within 60 days of receiving the first bill containing the error, and preventing creditors from damaging a consumer’s credit rating during a pending dispute.
a federal law that covers the reporting of debt repayment information, requiring, for example, the removal of certain information after seven or ten years, and giving consumers the right to know what is in their credit reports, to dispute inaccurate information, and to add a brief statement explaining accurate negative information.
a federal law that prohibits debt collectors from engaging in unfair, deceptive, or abusive practices, such as calling consumers at work after being told not to.
a program authorized by Congress, through which education loans are provided by private lenders and guaranteed by the federal government.
the total cost of credit, including interest and transaction fees.
a type of financial institution that makes consumer loans; generally, such loans are made to individuals with less than perfect credit ratings at higher interest rates.
a person who provides financial information and advice.
money provided to the student and/or parents to help pay for the student’s education.
desired results from one’s efforts to achieve personal economic satisfaction.
businesses that deal primarily with money, such as deposits, investments, and loans, rather than goods or services.
the ability to use knowledge and skills to manage one’s financial resources effectively for lifetime financial security.
a report that identifies a person’s financial goals, needs, and expected future earning, saving, investing, insurance, and debt management activities; it typically includes a statement of net worth.
products sold or provided by financial institutions, such as savings accounts, loans, etc.
a mortgage in which the interest rate and the amount of each payment remain constant throughout the life of the loan.
it is a repossession of property by a legal process due to default on terms of mortgage by the borrower.
intentional and illegal deception, misrepresentation, or concealment of information for monetary gain.
a federal form required to apply for federal student aid.
a sales charge paid when investments are purchased and sometimes when dividends are reinvested.
taking risks with personal finances or personal assets.
a court-sanctioned procedure that sets aside a portion of an employee’s wages to pay a financial obligation.
a non-cash contribution to a charitable organization which can be given a cash value.
a statement about what a person wants to be, do, or have, accomplished by taking certain steps; provides direction to a plan of action.
the process used to determine what an individual wants to be, do, or have, i.e., what a person wants to accomplish.
a transition period (generally six months following the date a borrower leaves school or drops below half-time status) during which the borrower is not required to make loan payments.
money for college that does not have to be repaid, which is based on a student’s financial need.
products considered environmentally safe according to objective, authoritative testing.
wages or salary before deductions for taxes and other purposes.
a written guarantee from the manufacturer or distributor that specifies the conditions under which the product can be returned, replaced, or repaired.
the crime of using another person’s name, credit or debit card number, Social Security number, or another piece of personal information to commit fraud.
an unwritten guarantee that a product is of sufficient quality to fulfill the purpose for which it was designed.
purchasing goods or services without considering needs, goals, or consequences.
purchasing goods or services without considering needs, goals, or consequences.
money earned from investments and employment.
an investment with specific tax advantages.
an overall rise in the prices of goods and services; the opposite of the less common deflation.
analyzing and organizing information for decision making.
a risk management tool that protects an individual from specific financial losses under specific terms and premium payments, as described in a written policy document.
a set amount an insured person must pay per loss before the insurance company will pay a claim.
the payment a person makes to an insurance company in exchange for its promise of protection and help.
payment for the use of someone else’s money; usually expressed as an annual rate in terms of a percent of the principal (the amount owed).
money that financial institutions, governments, or corporations pay for the use of investors’ money.
the percentage rate of interest charged to the borrower or paid to a lender, saver, or investor.
purchasing securities such as stocks, bonds, and mutual funds with the goal of increasing wealth over time, but with the risk of loss.
the amount of money invested in stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and other investment instruments.
a position of employment with specific duties and compensation.
a written contract specifying the terms for the use of an asset and the legal responsibilities of both parties to the agreement, such as a property owner and tenant.
using a written contract to specify the terms for the use of an asset and the legal responsibilities of both parties to the agreement, such as a property owner and tenant.
an actual or potential financial obligation.
a statistical measure of the average length of life from birth to death.
the way people choose to live their lives, based on values they have chosen.
the quality of an asset that permits it to be converted quickly into cash without loss of value.
a document that contains the signer’s desires for specific medical treatment in case the person is unable to make medical decisions; also known as a health care directive.
a contractual promise between a borrower and a lender; the borrower agrees to repay a sum of money (generally with interest) in exchange for the lender giving another sum of money.
an unlicensed person who lends money at an exorbitant rate of interest.
a situation where the lender will help the borrower when they are in danger of default to avoid foreclosure.
the legal agreement that a student makes with the lender when receiving an education loan.
a program financed by state and federal government tax revenues, to pay specified health care costs care for those who cannot afford them.
a federal government program, financed by deductions from wages, that pays for certain health care expenses for older citizens.
anything that is generally accepted as payment for goods and services; a medium of exchange; legal tender.
a long-term loan to buy real estate; that is, land and the structures on it.
a firm or individual who brings the borrower and lender together, receiving a commission if a sale results.
an investment tool that pools the money of many shareholders and invests it in a diversified portfolio of securities, such as stocks, bonds, and money market assets.
essentials or basics necessary for maintaining physical life including food, clothing, water, and shelter, sometimes called material well-being.
when the interest due on the loan is more than the monthly payments.
a measure of a person’s financial condition at a given time, equal to what that person owns (assets) minus what that person owes (liabilities).
an announcement issued by a bank when there is not enough money in the account to cover the amount of the check or transaction.
buying and selling goods and services electronically, primarily utilizing Web-based companies or sites.
an agreement with a financial institution that gives a borrower the use of money up to a specified limit for an indefinite time as long as repayment of the outstanding balance and finance charge proceeds on schedule; also known as revolving credit or a revolving line of credit.
the value of the second-best alternative that a person gives up when making one choice instead of another.
fees charged by the lender for processing the loan and are often expressed as a percentage of the loan amount.
an easy-access credit business that makes high-interest loans secured by personal property collateral, such as jewelry.
an easy-access credit business that makes high interest loans for the period of the borrower’s pay cycle. This practice is illegal in some states.
the means of settling a financial obligation, such as by cash, check, credit card, debit card, smart card, or stored value card.
an amount an employer withholds from a paycheck.
the influence that a social group has on an individual, based on the individual’s desire for the group’s approval.
a federal law that attempts to strengthen employees’ retirement security by, among other things, allowing employers to automatically enroll employees in retirement savings plans.
the principles and methods that individuals use to acquire and manage income and assets.
an individual's total annual income received from all sources, including wages, salaries, investments, etc.; also called "before-tax income".
taxes paid on personal income to the state and federal governments.
the act of voluntarily contributing to others’ welfare.
an attempt to criminally and fraudulently acquire sensitive information, such as usernames, passwords, and credit card details, by posing as a trustworthy entity in an electronic communication such as an email.
the location where a transaction occurs.
a collection of securities—such as stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and real estate—that an individual investor owns.
any of a number of fraudulent, deceptive, discriminatory, or unfavorable lending practices.
an amount of money originally invested, excluding any interest or dividends.
freedom from unauthorized release of personal information.
the government institution with jurisdiction over a deceased person’s will and estate.
the positive difference between total revenue and total expenses of a business or investment.
a tax on land and structures built on it; payments go to state and/or local governments to pay for police protection, public schools, libraries, etc.
a legal document that provides detailed information about mutual funds, stocks, bonds, and other investments offered for sale, as required by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Relatively innocent exaggerations used to sell products.
the value of money measured in the amount of goods and services that can be bought with it.
an illegal scheme of selling goods. Participants are recruited by advertisements offering big profits to those who pay a fee for agency rights, that is, rights to sell goods as a representative of the pyramid company. Each recruited agent then recruits others to join, with each new participant paying a fee to join.
how fast money in savings account or investment grows.
the process of comparing personal bank account records to the bank's records of that account balance in order to uncover any possible discrepancies.
the process of keeping an orderly account of a person’s financial affairs, including income earned, taxes paid, household expenditures, loans, insurance policies, and legal documents.
paying a periodic fee for the use of property.
a plan to buy a product with little or no down payment by renting it until the final payment is made, at which point the total paid far exceeds the product’s purchase price.
confiscation of collateral, often without notice, if a borrower defaults on a loan.
human resources are those resources people have within themselves, such as working knowledge, skill, mental effort, motivation, energy. Non-human or external resources include money, time, and equipment.
the point where a person stops employment completely, usually when reaching a specific age or when physical conditions prevent the person from working any longer.
accounts such as IRAs (Individual Retirement Accounts), annuities and 401Ks that allow individuals to save money toward retirement on a tax-deferred basis.
the measure of profitability of an investment.
an arrangement in which a homeowner borrows against the equity in his/her home and receives regular monthly tax-free payments from the lender.
a measure of the likelihood of loss or profit; the uncertainty of an investment’s rate of return.
the process of calculating risk and devising methods to minimize or manage loss, for example, by buying insurance or diversifying investments.
the amount of uncertainty or possibility of loss the individual can bear.
how long it takes money to double in value. A rough calculation of the time or interest rate needed to double the value of an investment.
compensation for work expressed as an annual sum and paid in prorated portions regularly-usually weekly, bi-weekly, or monthly.
tax paid as percent of the cost of a good or service; paid to local and state governments when goods and services are purchased.
the process of setting income aside for future spending.
money set aside for a future use that is held in easily accessed accounts, such as savings accounts and certificates of deposit (CDs).
a financial institution deposit account that pays interest and allows withdrawals.
a document representing a loan of more than one year to the U.S. government, to be repaid, with interest on a specified date.
a fraudulent or deceptive act.
an economic condition created by an excess of human wants over the resources necessary to satisfy them; an inability to satisfy all of everyone’s wants.
money for college that do not have to be repaid, which is awarded for merit or achievement.
a legal agreement that records a debt or equity obligation from a corporation, government, or other organization, OR collateral for a loan.
using premiums from many policyholders to reimburse the losses of a few, so that no one suffers a financially devastating loss.
interest calculated periodically on loan principal or investment principal only, not on previously earned interest.
a federal government program that provides retirement, survivor’s, and disability benefits, funded by a tax on income, which appears on workers’ pay stubs as a deduction labeled FICA (for Federal Insurance Contributions Act, the enabling legislation).
another name for budget.
the overall degree of comfort of an individual, household, or population, as measured by the amount of goods and services its members consume.
an investment that represents shares of ownership of the assets and earnings of a corporation.
a prepaid plastic card that allows purchases up to a set limit, at which point the card is discarded or; if "rechargeable," replenished from an account.
the quantities of an item that producers are willing and able to make available for sale at various prices over a given time period.
the relationship between the quantity consumers are willing and able to buy and the quantity producers are willing and able to produce; the point of agreement (quantity supplied equals quantity demanded) is where prices are set in a market-based economy.
gross wage or salary, plus bonuses, minus deductions such as taxes, health care premiums, and retirement savings.
government fees on business and individual income, activities, or products to support government programs.
an amount that a taxpayer who meets certain criteria can subtract from tax owed. Examples include a credit for earned income below a certain limit and for qualified postsecondary school expenses.
an expense that a taxpayer can subtract from taxable income. Examples include deductions for home mortgage interest and for charitable gifts.
the feature of an investment in which taxes due on principal and/or earnings are postponed until funds are withdrawn, often at retirement.
earnings, such as interest from municipal bonds that are free of certain taxes.
the relationship between time, money, and rate of return (interest), and their effect on earnings growth.
an amount paid for a service beyond what is required, usually to express satisfaction; also known as a gratuity.
a high-cost, short-term loan that uses the borrower’s automobile as collateral.
money that a government provides to citizens for reasons other than current employment or the delivery of goods or services in exchange. Examples include Social Security, veteran’s benefits, and welfare.
a legal arrangement through which a trust or manages a trustee’s assets for the good of one or more beneficiaries.
a federal law that requires financial institutions to disclose specific information about the terms and cost of credit, including the finance charge and the annual percentage rate (APR).
a federal law that requires financial institutions to disclose specific information about the terms and costs of interest-earning accounts—such as annual percentage yield (APY)—and certain other financial services.
earnings from sources other than employment, including investment returns and royalties.
services such as telephone, water, garbage collection, gas, and electric.
the process of reasoning to a conclusion using facts and values for purposes of determining worth, quality, importance, fairness, and credibility.
a set of criteria, standards, or principles that guide an individual or group’s behavior and provides a sense of direction to life.
prevailing beliefs and value systems of a given society passed on through social conditioning/enculturation.
an individual’s beliefs about what is important, desirable, and worthwhile, which often influence decisions.
a description of (a) how an individual defines future financial success, and (b) what he/she wants to accomplish; provides direction for decision and actions that invent the preferred future: What the future will look like if financial strategies are successfully implemented and one’s full potential is achieved.
working to help others or one’s community without being paid.
compensation for work usually calculated on an hourly, daily, or piecework basis and paid on schedule—usually weekly, biweekly, or monthly.
items that a person would like to have but are not essential for life.
accumulated assets; positive net worth.
increasing the total value of what one owns; one’s tangible assets using strategies to increase savings and personal asset accumulation, thereby promoting individual/family economic well-being and financial security.
aid in the form of money or necessities for those in need; often from a government program.
a legal declaration of a person’s wishes for the disposition of his or her estate after death.
employer deductions from employees’ earnings to pay employees’ taxes.
employment; occupation; effort exerted to make or do something.
the Federal Work-Study Program provides part-time jobs for undergraduate and graduate students with financial need, allowing them to earn money to help pay educational expenses.